spec: blocksync (#8586)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/blocksync/verification.md

## Block verification

When blocksyncing, a node is not participating in conensus. It is receiving blocks that have already been decided and committed. To avoid being fooled by malicious peers, the node has to verify the received blocks before executing the transactions and storing the block in its store. 

The verification in blocksync aims to apply the same logic as the [light client verification](../light-client/verification/README.md). The model relies on the existence of an **initial trusted state**. 

Based on this state we verify subsequent blocks. 

### Trusted state

> The light client additionally relies on the notion of a **trusting period**. A trusting period is the time during which we assume we can trust validators because, if we do detect misbehaviour, we can slash them - they are still bonded. Beyond this period, the validators do not have to have any bonded assets and cannot be held accountable for their misbheaviour. Blocksync-ing blocks will most often be outside this trusting period for a particular block. Therefore, the trusting period assumptions as they are in the light client, cannot be applied here. 

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear to me. In my view, the trusting period is nothing specific to the light client, but a consequence of the unbonding period. If we cannot apply the trusting period, this means that the whole protocol is in general unsafe, or more precisely, the problem we want to solve is unsolvable. 

For instance, if we want to blocksync from genesis, and genesis is 2 months old, all the initial validators might have unbonded. They can produce an alternative history, and make our new node always sync to a bad state. If we don't make additional assumptions the problem is unsolvable. (Or the protocol is just best-effort. But even then we should explain in what cases it works).

This means to say something meaningful about blocksync, we might need to add (or make explicit already existing implicit) assumptions, e.g., every new node can talk to at least one correct peer who has the correct history of blocks (headers) stored.

Author: The main point I agree with you on is the weak guarantees this initial trust in the validator set provides to us in blocksync. And I think we need to find a way to improve the guarantees on this by either starting a light client service to verify headers against or some other, safer solution.

I think there is a sentence about the node always having a correct peer but correct is not specified fully as you stated it here. Indeed, for this to be correct we do need  a peer who will send us a correct block (header), but I feel this assumption is weak. I will add this assumption explicitly for now but I do think we should come up with a safer solution.

Reviewer: One thing that may inform the assumptions is the use case. Perhaps we can differentiate:
- If you have a trusted state within the trusting period (w.r.t. to now): strong guarantees
- Otherwise: weak guarantees. We still provide automation, but you should double check the outcome.

For me the idea with witnesses is in the second option. "We cannot really give guarantees, but we want to make the attack more complicated." 

We should make the different use cases/assumptions and the following guarantees more clear.

Author: If we launched the light client as a service (as state sync does), do you think we could always provide strong guarantees? if so would this be a better option compared to witness verification? If we are satisfied with the witness model then I can certainly specify these things better.

**Switching from statesync to blocksync**

If we switch from statesync to blocksync, the last item in the block store is not the entire block. The store holds only the verified header and the commit that verified it. Therefore, we do need to fetch the corresponding block from our peers, verify it against data stored in the store and set the `last trusted block` to this block. 

To enable this, upon switching from statesync, we do not instruct the block pool to fetch blocks at height `H + 1` (where height `H` corresponds to the height of the header last verified with statesync). Instead we let it fetch the block at height H, but do not execute this block against the application (as this would fail - state is already updated to height H + 1. )

### Verifying blocks past the trusted state

<img src="img/bc-reactor-blocks.png" alt="block diagram" title="Block overview" width="80%" name="Block_overview"/>

The diagram above shows all blocks at play when verifying block at height ` H + 1` - `newBlock`, where at height `H` we have the trusted block. 

At a high level, the verification algorithm is represented by the code below. 

~~~golang

> if !LastCommit.verify(trustedBlock) && NewBlock.validatorSet == trustedState.validatorSet {

Reviewer 2: So what happens if `LastCommit` does not verify but the validator sets match?
I have the impression that, in that case, we get into the else (line 59) and continue verification. Is that what we want if `LastCommit` failed verification?

Author: Forgot to push the changed condition, it is 

`!LastCommit.verify(trustedBlock) || NewBlock.validatorSet |= trustedState.validatorSet ` and then we will not continue the verification but ask for a new block.

## Block verification

When blocksyncing, a node is not participating in conensus. It is receiving blocks that have already been decided and committed. To avoid being fooled by malicious peers, the node has to verify the received blocks before executing the transactions and storing the block in its store. 

The verification in blocksync aims to apply the same logic as the [light client verification](../light-client/verification/README.md). The safety guarantees of the light client model are provided by verifiying blocks starting from an **initial trusted state** and using validators who were bonded within a **trusting period**. Once this period expires, the validators could have unbonded, and we cannot rely on them being hoenst anymore. In blocksync, we can be **outside** the trusting period. Therefore, the guarantees provided by blocksync verification can be divided in two groups: 

> - The block is within the trusting period, we can punish validators, and provide guarantees that if a block is signed by trusted validators, they are indeed correct. 

Author: The guarantees in this case should b the same as the ones provided by the light client - at least a subset of them is honest. As we do witness verification, we will catch the dishonest one because we will send evidence to the nodes to determine which one is lying.

> - The block is outside the trusting period and we cannot guarantee that the validators are still honest. We can however make a potential attack by those validators more complicated by additionally verifying the block using other peers as *witnesses*.

Author: That is what is happening in some form. We are accepting blocks by verifying them and checking against witnesses although we are outside the trusting period. Once we are in a trusting period we could determine someone lying and we'd stop syncing. We do not have a solution now as to how we would help the syncing node get back on track.

> - The block is outside the trusting period and we cannot guarantee that the validators are still honest. We can however make a potential attack by those validators more complicated by additionally verifying the block using other peers as *witnesses*.

Reviewer 2: Maybe, a way could be to verify all blocks up to the trusting period, but NOT apply them. Then, when we reach the trusting period:

* either we confirm we've not been lied to --> we apply all blocks we had verified now
* or we detect the block sequence we have been verifying is fake --> we throw away all those blocks and start over (and submit then needed evidence if possible)

I know it'd be involved to modify the current code to do this, but it is definitely possible. However, my feeling is: "this is worth mentioning as a possibility, but I would not implement it because the base solution (i.e., just abandon the fooled node) is good enough given the (very low) likelihood of this occurring in production"

A state becomes trusted once it passes the validation. The section below discusses this state in more details.

### Trusted state

Currently there are two possible ways to obtain a trusted state :
 1. If the node is blocksync-ing from genesis, we have to verify the very first block and mark it as the initial trusted state.
 

>  [//]: # (trust the validators provided in the initial state and use them to verify the initial block received from peers.)

Author: No, sorry, this was supposed to be deleted.

 2. The node loads the last block stored in its local block store. 

**Case 1 - blocksync from genesis**

> In this case we only verify that the validator hash of the block matches the validator set of the initial state. We will use the initially provided validator set for verification and further verify the block against witne+sses. In this scenario, this state is very likely to be outside the trusting period. We will accept this block as a trusted state and store it inside the node's block store. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case we only verify that the validator hash of the block matches the validator set of the initial state. We will use the initially provided validator set for verification and further verify the block against witnesses. In this scenario, this state is very likely to be outside the trusting period. We will accept this block as a trusted state and store it inside the node's block store. 
```

> In this case we only verify that the validator hash of the block matches the validator set of the initial state. We will use the initially provided validator set for verification and further verify the block against witne+sses. In this scenario, this state is very likely to be outside the trusting period. We will accept this block as a trusted state and store it inside the node's block store. 

Reviewer 2: I have one thought here. I understand it is reasonable to trust the validator set from genesis (social consensus), and therefore the first block if the validators hash matches. But then, as we advance with later blocks, but still far away from the trusting window, someone could try to feed us with a fake block forking from the actual chain. How do we deal with this case?

Author: We witness verify, even the initial block. But this also does not provide us 100% correctness guarantees as the witnesses could be lying. But if we assume at least one is correct, we should be able to detect a divergence and realize someone is trying to fool us. The problem is how would we determine who that is.

Reviewer 2: I see. Then I think it's important to stress somewhere/somehow that, until we reach the trusting window, we cannot be sure we are applying the right blocks. And thus, the operator should be ready to accept that, right at the end, the node is unusable and they need to start over (we should also point out that this is extremely unlikely)

Author: Indeed. It is also worth noting that, as a faulty node cannot forge signatures, if we assume the 2/3 correctness model, we should have some certainty that if the verification passes, the blocks are also correct.

> It is worth noting that, running block sync from the first height is significantly slower than running statesync first. However, statesync does not keep the entire blockchain history and some operators might opt not to state sync. The reason is that, if sufficiently many nodes state sync and other nodes who have historical data fail or leave the network, we have no history.

Reviewer 2: > we have no history.

I'd rather say something like "the network ends up with gaps in the block history"

**Case 2 - blocksync starting from pre-existing state**

If the node is not starting from gensis, there will be pre-existing state in its local block store. 

This can happen in the following two cases:

- The node is blocksyncing after completing state sync.

- The node has crashed and is now recovering.

In both of these cases, we can trust the state in the store. State sync runs the light client verification protocol. If the crash happened during consensus or sync-ing, the only blocks in the store are blocks that are verified or decided. 

> If we can trust this initial state at height H, we can use this fact to eliminate faulty blocks whose `lastCommit` at height H+1 does not verify the trusted block. Additionally, we can double check the validator sets that signed the block at H + 1 against the expected validator sets for this height. The expected validator sets are stored within the trusted state and returned to us upon applying the block and executing it against the application.

Reviewer 2: What if the initial height H has fallen out of the trusting period?

Author: The initial (trusted) state (maybe the wording should be adjusted) is a block and the commit that validated this  block. We use it to increase the trust in the block at H + 1 but we do not have guarantees that the validators that signed block at H are indeed still honest.

Author: Good point, I think we should discuss this more. There were a few solutions proposed to deal with this but a lot of them were dismissed due to the tradeoff between added complexity and performance + likelyhood of this happening. 

Bottom line, all scenarios in which a syncing node is fooled will not impact o ther nodes performing consensus because once the node switches to consensus, the faulty blocks will be detected. However, as you stated, the syncing node can get punished even though it had no malicious intent.  This scenario is mentioned below in line 107.

Reviewer 2: While in blocksync, the node is not supposed to interact with other nodes (other than just requesting blocks), so we're safe. The problem is if we switch to consensus (e.g. due to lack of progress) and then start voting, or proposing...
OTOH, checking that we have reached the trusting window doesn't seem complex or expensive, but I might be missing something.

**Switching from statesync to blocksync**

If we switch from statesync to blocksync, the last item in the block store is not the entire block. The store holds only the verified header and the commit that verified it. Therefore, we do need to fetch the corresponding block from our peers, verify it against data stored in the store and set the `last trusted block` to this block. 

> To enable this, upon switching from statesync, we do not instruct the block pool to fetch blocks at height `H + 1` (where height `H` corresponds to the height of the header last verified with statesync). Instead we let it fetch the block at height H, but do not execute this block against the application (as this would fail - state is already updated to height H + 1. )

Reviewer 2: I don't understand why we need to fetch the whole block `H`. Isn't the App state already reflecting that height?
Shouldn't it be enough fetching `H+1` directly and verifying it against `H` (which is trusted via light client)?

Author: Right now, the verification of a block against another block, requires some fields not present in the header. We could alternatively not fetch block at height H in this particular scenario but verify only the signatures. But for H + 1 ,we do not have the signatures (they are stored at H + 2), so we would have to verify the signatures in `VerifyCommit` against H and decide to trust on H + 1 based on that. This is also a valid possibility.

### Verifying blocks past the trusted state

<img src="img/bc-reactor-blocks.png" alt="block diagram" title="Block overview" width="80%" name="Block_overview"/>

The diagram above shows all blocks at play when verifying block at height ` H + 1` - `newBlock`, where at height `H` we have the trusted block. 

At a high level, the verification algorithm is represented by the code below. 

~~~golang

> if LastCommit.verify(trustedBlock) {

Reviewer 2: Where does `LastCommit` come from? Is it missing from the figure?

Also, shouldn't this condition be negated?

Author: I just realized it did not save from the graphic. It's the commit in `NewBlock`.  And yes, it should be negated.

        // NewBlock is invalid, request new
            request_newBlock_from_other_peer(height: h + 1)
} else { 

>     if NewBlock.validatorSet == trustedState.validatorSet {		     

Reviewer 2: What if this doesn't hold?

Author: We search for a new block, I mvoed the condition into the first if.

        if  LastCommit2.validatorSetHash == trustedState.validatorSetHash && 
		verifyBlock.validatorSetHash == trustedState.nextValidatorSetHash {
			if LastCommit2.verify(NewBlock) {
                        if verify_block_with_peers(NewBlock) {
								ApplyBlock(NewBlock) 
                        }

>             }|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            }
```

        } else
			find_new_verifyBlock(height: h + 2)
    }
}

~~~

> We try to increase the trust in the NewBlock by first confirming that  it's `lastCommit` field indeed verifies the trusted block. We then confirm that the validator hash matches the expected hash. But to fully verify the block we need to check it against the signatures that signed it. They are stored within the `lastCommit2` of `verifyBlock` at height `H+2`. As we have no gurantees on this block, we again increase our trust in it by confirming that the validators whose signatures are in `lastCommit2` are a match for the expected validator set.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We increase the trust in the NewBlock by first confirming that  its `lastCommit` field indeed verifies the trusted block. We then confirm that the validator hash matches the expected hash. But to fully verify the block we need to check it against the signatures that signed it. They are stored within the `lastCommit2` of `verifyBlock` at height `H+2`. As we have no guarantees on this block, we again increase our trust in it by confirming that the validators whose signatures are in `lastCommit2` are a match for the expected validator set.
```

#### *Witness verification*

**Note**. This is not implemented yet. 

If all these checks pass, the reactor verifies that other peers have the same block at the particular height. 

> In order to reduce traffic, we do not ask the peers to provide the whole block to us, rather only the header. If crosschecking the headers fails then the node requests the remainder of the block to decide on whether this peer is faulty or not.

Reviewer 2: To further reduce traffic, we could just request the block's hash (smaller than the header)

- Request data from more peers.  

Both cases can be a potential attack on the joining node. We discuss these different attack possibilities and design shortcomings in the section below.

## Problems with current verification and reactor design

The crux of many concerns with regards to the correctness and safety of the block sync reactor lies in the fact a node connects to peers. 

Currently, the only constraint a node has is that it has to connect to **a** peer. An improved design should require a node to connect to at least two peers. 

We have no guarantees on the correctness of the peers we are connected to. 
- Once we replace a peer due to it having timed out or not reporting a correct block, nothing prevents a node from reconnecting to it - *there is no notion of blacklisted peers*.
- If we connect to a subset of peers, they could feed the node faulty data. Eventually, when the node switches to consensus, it would realize there is something wrong, but then the node itself might be blacklisted.
- Alternatively, a node that is fed faulty data, could, upon switching to conensus, become part of a light client attack by serving as a faulty witness. 

> - There is no check whether the maximum height reported by peers is true or not. A slow node could report a very distant height to the node - for example 2000, when the blockchain is at height 1000 in fact. This would lead to one part of the condition to switch to consensus never being true. To prevent the node switching due to not advancing, the malicious node sends a new block very slowly. Thus the node progresses but can never participate in consensus. This issue could potentially be mitigated if, instead of taking the maximum height reported by peers, we report the lowest of their maximums. The idea is that peers should be close enought to the top of the chain in any case. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- There is no check whether the maximum height reported by peers is true or not. A slow node could report a very distant height to the node - for example 2000, when the blockchain is at height 1000 in fact. This would lead to one part of the condition to switch to consensus never being true. To prevent the node switching due to not advancing, the malicious node sends a new block very slowly. Thus the node progresses but can never participate in consensus. This issue could potentially be mitigated if, instead of taking the maximum height reported by peers, we report the lowest of their maximums. The idea is that peers should be close enough to the top of the chain in any case. 
```

> - There is no check whether the maximum height reported by peers is true or not. A slow node could report a very distant height to the node - for example 2000, when the blockchain is at height 1000 in fact. This would lead to one part of the condition to switch to consensus never being true. To prevent the node switching due to not advancing, the malicious node sends a new block very slowly. Thus the node progresses but can never participate in consensus. This issue could potentially be mitigated if, instead of taking the maximum height reported by peers, we report the lowest of their maximums. The idea is that peers should be close enought to the top of the chain in any case. 

Reviewer 2: Reporting the lowest is open to the "opposite" attack. A malicious node might cause you to switch to consensus too early.
Probably something like the median, and the assumption that less than 1/2 of the nodes you are connected to are faulty would be a reasonable compromise.

> - A blocksyncing node can flood peers with requests - constantly reporting that it has not synced up. At the moment the maximum amount of requests received is limited and protects peers to some extend against this attack. 

Reviewer 2: I could be wrong on this, but another problem is that the blocks sent/received via block synch reactor are not chunked like in consensus. So a busy chain containing big blocks might cause performance problems. Also, a malicious node could try to feed big blocks to try to "choke" the receiver.

I am aware this affects performance rather than correctness

Author: That is why I suggested that maybe we send around headers and blocks only once verification passes. However, this just delays the problem. .
